---
title: Goodbye, Meteora
layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2022-04-20
tags: ['travel', 'greece', 'meteora', 'kalambaka']
---

Five days later, and we're back on the same train we took to come into this small town in central Greece, headed in the
opposite direction. Kalambaka is the end of the line in these parts. Doesn't matter if you're heading north or south;
there's one way in and one way out.

The ancient riverbed the train is toddling through is thick with farmland. The Greeks, it seems, will waste none of
this rich soil. It's been raining off and on for the last few days, so the land looks especially green now. I don't know
if it's the fresh water stimulating new growth or if my eyes are clinging to the bright green spring leaves amidst the
grey clouds overhead. Whichever it is, it's beautiful. And the snow-capped mountains towering in the distance certainly
don't hurt either.

## Arriving in Town

We came to this area for one purpose really - to see the cliff-top monasteries of Meteora. We'd heard a lot about this
incredible UNESCO world heritage site and needed to see it for ourselves. The problem was the rain. According to the
forecast, a storm the size of the country would be rolling through just when we wanted to be there. Not exactly the
conditions you hope for when hiking up steep stone paths. We have good shoes, but those old worn stones are slippery
even when dry. So we'd have to wait it out.

According to the weather report, there would be a break on Tuesday. So we found lodging and booked ourselves a room
until Wednesday. It meant spending five days in Kalambaka (Kalabaka? Kalampaka? How are you actually supposed to spell
it anyway?). Five days was a lot more time than we meant to give to this place, but so what? We're not in a rush. We've
got all year. Besides, we needed time to plan our next steps.

We arrived at sunset, which was beautiful, but blocked by the clouds. The cliffs of Meteora loom over the town. They're
impossible not to notice and, as we stepped off the train, our excitement seemed to bubble over.

The town itself, however, felt strange. It felt both neglected and developed. The same motifs were graffitied all over
town: the number 13, a clover, and the word "Shamrock". Later, we found stickers on some street signs talking about the
13th anniversary of some Shamrock Club. Had there been an insane celebration recently with club members ecstatically
painting the town green with the number 13? Was Kalambaka overrun with gang activity?

At the same time, the main street is lined with modern coffee shops, bakeries, souvenir shops, and restaurants hawkers
with too much bluster. All the classic tourist-trap experiences. I found it hard to understand Kalambaka the way I'd
like to. Is it a town on the rise or the decline? Maybe it's just moving sideways.

## The First Hike

There are a few routes to get to the monasteries. There's a paved road that goes east out of town and slowly curves up
top of the cliffs and a road that goes west out of down and does the same thing. Or, if you like to walk, there's an old
path that goes up the middle.

The path starts at the northern edge of town and winds its way up to the Monastery of the Holy Trinity and the main road,
from which you can reach all the other monasteries. I don't know if it's true or not, but I imagined the monks of
centuries past walking the same route to get into town. Perhaps they would walk in small groups of two or three, heads
bowed in the rain, draped in some heavy cloth. It has the feel of ages.

About halfway up, the canopy begins to open up and the insane panoramas begin. It becomes quickly clear just how far
you've climbed and just how sheer the drop to the bottom is. The tiled terracotta roofs of Kalambaka spill out from a
narrow valley between two enormous walls of stone and into the Plain of Thessaly below. Above, the Byzantine walls of the
monastery rise as if they had always been there, as natural a part of the cliffs as anything could be.

Of course, they're not. They are made of brick and stone and mortar, just like any other building. It's hard to imagine
how they might have been built, all those years ago. Wikipedia tells me that sometime in the 13th century construction
on the churches began with monks who would somehow climb up the rocks, then lower nets and ladders to bring materials
to the top. Until the 1920s, when stone steps were carved into the cliff faces, those nets and ladders were the only way
up. Apparently two brothers spent 22 years hoisting materials to the top of one rock formation, then took a mere
20 days to complete the Monastery of Varlaam.

Although only 6 monasteries remain today, there were once 24 in total. Centuries of abandonment, persecution, and war
have toppled the rest.

On the first full day after we arrived, rain was forecast to fall at around 1 in the afternoon. We figured we could do a
quick hike up, see one of the monasteries, then hike back down. If all went well, we'd be safely (and warmly) in our
room long before the worst of it. We rushed up the path, barely stopping more than twice to catch our breath, ascended
the stone steps to the Monastery of the Holy Trinity and walked its halls, then rushed back down. Above, the skies
menaced the town.

And they continued to do so for quite some time. The rain that was supposed to fall at 1 in the afternoon held off until
the next day. It was a little frustrating, to be sure. What if the rain didn't stop before we had to leave? Would we
not be able to see any of the other monasteries or go on the long hike we were dreaming of? The weather service, it
seemed, was not all that reliable. We would just have cross our fingers and have faith.

Not to gloss over it: The Monastery of the Holy Trinity is really, really cool. There's a winding stone staircase that
brings you up to the entrance, a large arched wooden door. When you enter, immediately to the left is a narrow room with
a tall domed ceiling adorned with gorgeous orthodox paintings of Jesus, the saints, and the apostles. Picture lots of
gold, bold lines, and bold colors. In another room is some sort of cart and rope system which they clearly used to raise
and lower goods and people in the days before the stone stairs. There was also a sort of balcony or courtyard area from
which you could view the entire valley below. The monastery is still active (as are all the remaining 6 monasteries), so
much of it was off limits. But the parts we could see were really, really amazing.

## The Second Hike

Eventually, the rain did let up. We only had the one full day of rain and we made good use of it. We visited a museum
that was partly a museum of natural history and partly a museum of mushrooms. We really enjoyed the mushroom exhibit,
but all the taxidermied animals were also somewhat off-putting, and it was a little hard to tell which ones were from
elsewhere and which ones were from the Meteora area. We spent the rest of the day researching and planning our next
steps.

Tuesday, the sun broke through and Meteora shone in all its glory. We had breakfast and hit the trail. We took the same
route up as we did last time, winding up the old path towards the Monastery of the Holy Trinity. This time, however, we
cut over to the road and made our way to one of the other monasteries - the Monastery of St Stephen. Although, perhaps
more appropriately it should be called the Nunnery of St Stephen as it was converted into a nunnery in 1961 and remains
so today. We walked about its grounds for a while, enjoyed the smell of the incense, the incredible views, and their
small museum. One interesting tidbit: we overheard a tour guide explaining that one of the works in their museum is from
the man who would eventually become known as El Greco. Apparently he came from Crete originally and had a completely
different name then.

The sun stayed with us and we continued on our way. The Monastery of Rousanou and the Great Meteoron were cloesd by the
time we got there, but we were able to enter the Monastery of Varlaam. Varlaam is the second largest of the monasteries
of Meteora and is truly a work of art. There's a church inside composed of two rooms and decorated in a similar style to
the smaller room from the Monastery of the Holy Trinity, except much more elaborately and graphically. This church
seemed to take pains to depict in detail the agonies of the martyrs and those cast to hell. Alexa joked that they
should've put a trigger warning by the entrance and I fully agree. It was pretty intense.

On a side note, we had a picnic lunch on a large rock overlooking the Monastery of Rousanou and the valley below, which
is probably the most epic picnic I've ever had. Wow. What an incredible view. (And for those wondering, lunch was some
fruit and a bit of various pastries we picked up from a bakery in town. I have to say, I'm loving all this spanikopita.)

As we wrapped up our self-guided tour of the monasteries, we lost the trail for a bit and decided to just take the main
road back down. We ran into a couple other tourists who, attempting the same route as us, ran into the same problem. So
basically what I'm saying is, AllTrails probably led us astray and it's totally not our fault. It didn't really matter
anyway; the views are incredible no matter how you go.

I'm glad we stayed long enough to see the monasteries. I'm glad we didn't rush it. And I'm also glad to move on.

There's more to say, as there always is. Maybe I'll write about it another day.

See you soon!
